Please welcome Vice President of
Development Technologies,
Ted Goldstein.
So I don't even know if that
was a long enough break for
people to forget my name.
So we're going to go through this
pretty quickly because Java on Mac OS X,
it just works.
It just works great.
And I think that really the
questions that came up in between
the last session and here,
people talk about, well,
so if you're putting
efforts into Objective-C,
you're taking efforts away from Java,
maybe you're going to drop Java,
maybe you're going to drop Objective-C.
And I think it's important to realize
that Apple is not a small little company,
right?
We can do many things and
appeal to many people and really
have a very rich commitment.
And I'll talk a little bit about
some signs that you can see
of Apple's commitment to Java.
We'll talk, of course,
about Java on Mac OS X and give you kind
of a roadmap through WWDC of sessions
and a roadmap of where we are going
with Java and the pathway forward.
to 1.4.
So, without further ado,
why Java at Apple?
Well, Java is Apple's cross-platform
development strategy.
We think that certainly
in this marketplace,
many developers need to develop
applications for Macintosh
and for other platforms.
And Java fulfills this
function not just well,
but incredibly well.
And that's because it has
some fabulous features.
It's binary portability,
it's reliability because
it is a well-safed and
semantically checked language,
which actually helps the
first feature as well.
The fact is that many machine problems,
many times when you write perhaps
a C program for one machine
architecture but bring it over
to another machine architecture,
you find and discover all sorts
of flaws in how you programmed it
that you were not actually writing
in a machine-independent way.
Java is designed from the
beginning so that it is portable,
it is safe, and it is reliable.
It is secure when you want to develop
web-based applications or applications
that are incrementally built,
that load themselves and is
composed of frameworks and piece
parts from multiple vendors.
And of course, very importantly,
it is popular.
There are many feet of books on
Java and there are many other components
and reusable systems that you can
use to make a great Java system.
And then again,
Java works great on Mac OS X.
And you'll see in what we talk about
that there are similarities in the
fundamental design of the Mac OS X system
and of Java that are inherently similar,
that have allowed for these two
great environments and great
platforms to work well together.
So don't believe just my word for it.
Hitesh Seth in the
Java Developer Journal writes,
"There's been a dramatic shift in Apple's
strategy toward Java support in Mac OS,
and it could jumpstart the deployment
of Java-based applications and services
on a user-friendly consumer operating
system." We think this is key.
This marriage of X and Mac OS, really,
we think we're doing a pretty fabulous
job at enterprise applications.
Now the frontier is on
shrink-wrapped apps,
where people are developing
applications that are going
into the consumer marketplace.
And I think you'll see some examples
of why we believe that's possible now.
Peter Coffey, the well-named,
writes in E-Week,
"Apple has done a tremendous job
of making Java a more efficient
and more efficient way of
developing and deploying Java.
And Java code run well,
really well on the Mac,
supporting such refinements as hardware
graphics acceleration and anti-aliasing
in a way that's completely transparent to
the programmer." If you think about it,
it really is our job to
make your lives easy.
Part of that has got to be that we
take these features of the fabulous
Quartz graphics engine and the Quartz
system and really use it to the full
advantage and really to take things
like OpenGL and really make it so that
these are are simple and easy to use.
Apple drinks our own Java.
We use Java ourselves in many,
many systems, actually, not just three,
but I'm going to talk
only about three today.
When you go into one of our
beautiful new Apple retail stores,
take a look at that point-of-sale system.
That cash register is a Java application.
In fact,
all of Apple's business runs on Java.
Apple uses SAP and SAP client
applications written in Java for all
of our sales automation and order
tracking and really just managing
the whole inventory and parts pieces.
And that has been a fabulous
piece of the system.
So really,
when you buy a Macintosh today,
some part of that order,
probably most of that order,
has transited through a
Java application environment.
And then thirdly, and most recently,
we've introduced off our Mac.com,
our iTool system, Webmail.
And that's available and able to
access your Mac.com email account.
And that uses Java and
WebObject Server that we'll
be talking more about as well.
So really,
we've used Java for multiple things,
not just our own internal applications,
but also in helping us choose what
applications we want and how we
interact with the rest of the world.
[Transcript missing]
Two more features.
So if you use this,
you also get the ability
to--you also get JAR caching.
What that means is that the JAR file,
which represents the applets,
which is the container for the applet,
is kept on the system and is
cached and shared across browsers.
And it also has a new developer console.
This is a new feature.
The Java plugin is a new feature for
Jaguar that we encourage people to use.
On top of all that,
we then do a bunch of optimizations.
The Acqua look and feel
means that when you use a
Java application-- How many people,
by the way, saw the WebObjects
demonstration previously?
Just before now.
What that--you know,
you could see that it was
clearly an Acqua interface,
but it is 100% pure Java application.
Using JAR files,
a well-formatted JAR file with the
correct manifest in it will actually
be double-clickable on the platform.
Just two clicks, you know, bam,
it's up and running.
And as well,
we support JAR files stored in the
Mac OS X bundle format for when
you need to ship many resources
that are more complicated.
Another very important feature that is,
I think, special about Java on the
Mac OS X is the sharing technology.
It essentially is the equivalent
of shared libraries that allow for
about six or seven megabytes of
the common class file information,
the Java Foundation classes,
to be shared between one
Java application and another.
So this improves responsiveness
means that the incremental overhead
for additional Java applications
is much less on the Macintosh.
Although this is a technology
that we've given back to Sun,
and we hope that Sun will be including
it in other platforms as well,
it started here first.
Graphics, of course,
are crucial and critical to how we
believe people should use the Macintosh.
So, of course,
we have the Quartz-based Java 2D system
and Quartz Extreme interfaces,
which really take advantage
of hardware acceleration.
But above and beyond that,
we've gone and used
OpenGL whenever possible,
when you have enough
video RAM on your box,
to really accelerate everything,
all the way down to the texture mapping.
And there are sessions later in the
week that will go into more detail
about these terrific features.
So, given this,
what I want to do is invite Alan Samuel,
our Java evangelist,
up to show a little bit
about actual applications.
Because this is not just
about the technologies,
but also about what people do with
it to create great shrink-wrap apps.
Alan?
Thank you, Ted.
So I'm supposed to be
showing you guys a demo,
right?
It looks like I'm doing a
presentation myself here.
This little application right here,
I don't know... Hey, Alan?
Yeah?
That's not right.
What's not right?
You're not Minister of Java Evangelion,
you're Chief Minister of Java Evangelion.
Oh, let me correct that here.
If you guys take a look and
look at the application here
that I'm working in here,
this is actually... oh,
let me spell it right.
You're the Chef.
Chef, right?
How about that?
This is actually ThinkFree Office.
ThinkFree Office is an application
written by a Korean developer.
The idea here is this is a
complete Office compatible suite,
so it can read and write all of
Microsoft Office file formats.
Now, the really interesting thing here
is you'll see you've got all the
correct placement for the menu bars.
The interface itself is
in the Aqua look and feel,
so it is a swing application.
Some of the value that
ThinkFree actually adds,
beyond what you get today
currently with Microsoft Office,
is the fact that they actually
localize for several languages that
you currently don't have available
to you if you were to go out and
purchase Microsoft Office's products.
The cool thing here is I just want to
show you that we could actually use a
100% pure Java application to be able
to do our presentations here today.
This actual application was not
actually written on our platform.
It was written somewhere else and
was easily taken over to Mac OS X.
So this is kind of great.
This is kind of fun.
Now I'm showing you some of the
features that we've got here.
Now I'm showing you some
of the productivity stuff.
Now let's get down to what
I would really be doing if I was
up here and having a good time.
And that would probably
be playing a game.
Now let me tell you a story
about this particular developer.
This is actually a Japanese developer,
CyberStep.
The story about these guys,
I met CyberStep at Java 1 Japan.
We actually came off the stage.
I did a presentation there.
They walked up to me and they showed
me this massive multiplayer game,
completely written in
Java on a Windows laptop.
I went, "Hey, that's great.
What do you guys need to
make this happen?" We sat
down and we talked with them.
And the only real specific
technology that they had that was
outside the Java specifications,
they had written some of their own
JNI libraries to call out to OpenGL.
So they had done their
own glue work there.
So we sat down with them.
We spent an hour in the
booth at Java 1 Japan.
And this is what we got.
I'm going to give you guys a
little example of this here.
I'm going to go down
to game settings here.
I'm going to put this on full screen.
Now remember,
this is a full-blown Java application.
A lot of cases people don't believe me.
We'll pick a little character here.
We'll pick, I don't know,
who should we pick here?
Let's pick,
we'll go back to this guy here.
This is an anime-style game,
typical Japanese application here.
Let's see if I can
play a little bit here.
[Transcript missing]
If I could get rid of my gun,
I could go get that head and throw
that at all the little people here.
Let me get in here and battle a
little bit and see if I don't get
beaten up by some of these women.
The whole point here, I mean,
if we look at this sort of game,
is that this is the type of
application that you guys can build,
anybody can build,
with Java and Mac OS X.
I personally was pretty amazed
when we saw the sort of solutions
that these guys were developing.
Just to let you know, the company here,
CyberStep,
who built this particular game,
actually they're a middleware company.
They're actually going to be selling
this as an engine that's currently
in beta for anybody that wants to do
massive multiplayer game development.
So these are all the types of services
that are available to you guys today,
the sort of solutions that we
expect to see on the platform.
Later on, you're actually going to
see some excellent demos.
I don't want to steal anybody's thunder,
but that's just a look at some of
the things that you guys are doing,
and keep it coming.
That's basically what I want to say,
keep coming up with great
solutions like this.
Can we go ahead and go back to slides?
[Transcript missing]
Oh, it was over there.
Thank you, Ted.
I better not throw this.
Let's talk a little bit about
some of the tools that are
available on our platform today.
I'm sure you've seen a lot of sessions
so far covering Project Builder,
our excellent integrated development IDE,
but let's talk about some of the
other language-specific IDEs that
are out there and available today.
One of which I'll mention
right off the gate,
which is Borland's JBuilder
and their Optimize-It product.
One of the things that you do have
with Borland if you're interested
in purchasing the JBuilder product
is we do have a significant discount
available to all ADC members.
That's a great benefit of
being a member of our program,
so you'll be able to
get that at a discount.
Optimize-It is another excellent
tool that Borland recently acquired.
IntelliJ's IDE, Sun, NetBeans,
and Forte for Java.
Also IBM has an Eclipse
IDE that's recently out,
and of course MetroWorks
Code Warrior for those of you
that saw the last presentation.
These are just a host of some of
the solutions that are available.
We couldn't obviously cover all of
the solutions that are available
today on Mac OS X and Java,
but with more and more tools out
there in the Java space actually
being written in Java themselves,
the story of bringing those folks
over to Mac OS X is much easier.
I think as more and more
people move to pure Java,
we're going to get more and more
tools obviously on our platform.
With that,
I'm going to go ahead and bring up...
Let me go the other way here.
I'm going the wrong way.
I'm going to go ahead and bring up
Devon Poolman of Zero-G Software.
And Devon is going to give you a
demonstration of Install Anywhere.
Now, hopefully all of you know that
you do have Install Anywhere
in the bag and you've had a
chance to sample your chocolate.
So I think you have
Devon to thank for that.
Well, today,
Zero-G and Install Anywhere is releasing
Install Anywhere Mac OS X Edition.
It's a brand new edition
for Install Anywhere for
the Install Anywhere family.
And as Alan mentioned,
you'll find the Cocoa version,
we call it, in your bags.
And if you are not a attendee,
maybe an exhibitor,
please feel free to drop by our booth.
We do have some extras.
But Mac OS X Edition is
very important to Zero-G,
and I think it's important to
developers for two reasons.
One is, well,
it's generally a perfect fit.
It's Install Anywhere in Mac OS X.
Mac OS X backend is Unix.
Install Anywhere has been
doing Unix development,
Unix installations for
over five years now.
On top of that,
Install Anywhere is built on Java.
Java being a virtually native
API on Mac OS X makes it very easy
to run and operate on Mac OS X.
I'm gonna go ahead and start off here.
By showing how easy it is to
work with Install Anywhere,
we're gonna start with installing a
demo application called Office Suite.
Now,
this application is a Java application,
but Install Anywhere is equally capable
for deploying your Cocoa application,
your Carbon application,
whatever you need to do.
So here's the basic designer.
In adding files to Install Anywhere,
it's as simple as just dragging
and dropping into our designer.
And we have kind of a what you
see is what you get layout.
We can move stuff around.
And this shows you exactly
what's going to be installed.
Additionally,
as this is a Java application,
we can look at some of the Java-specific
features in Install Anywhere,
such as automatically
setting the class path.
and creating a launcher
for our application.
In this case,
it's even going to automatically
search our main classes.
And it'll pop up here,
and we'll see Office Suite,
which is my application.
and I'm even going to add an icon
for this particular application.
Go ahead and select that.
and that's how we just add our files,
very simply.
And customizing our install
is also very simple.
We have our pre-install steps.
You can see our important note,
our introduction.
And we can also control
the look and feel,
which is very important
for Mac OS X developers.
We can control and view the look
and feel inside of our project.
So I'm going to select a
different background image.
It's fully skinnable.
and we can even preview
directly inside of the designer,
see what your installer
is going to look like.
From that point,
all I need to do is click Build,
and it's going to go ahead and build,
in this case, a web installer.
Got one precooked right here.
And the web installer includes
not just your downloadable,
executable installer,
but also a nice web page in Java applet
that makes it easy for your end users
to download and run the installer.
All you need to do is
click on the button.
The applet will run, download,
and launch the installer.
And now here we have the
installer that we created.
We're localized to 29
different languages.
And as we click through,
you'll see we have the
nice Aqua look and feel.
Thanks to Java, it comes very easy to us.
Here we get to see the basic installer.
As it walks us through,
you can see the steps we take.
The readme we have here
has full HTML support,
including links that actually pop out.
We'll continue to click through.
We'll install this application.
And here's one of the features
that's unique to Install Anywhere,
which is the ability to install
our alias directly to the dock.
So we'll see that as we
go through installation.
Click Install, and once again you'll see
our nice Aqua progress bar.
And here's our new shortcut,
our new alias.
Excuse me.
Now that our application is installed,
mind you this was a Java application,
we created a native launcher for it.
You click and we'll see here's
our Office Suite application
1.0 and that's it.
Now, that's client installers
for Install Anywhere,
but Install Anywhere is equally
capable of building installers
for your client applications,
but also your server applications.
And some of the new features in this
latest release make it very easy
to do your server-side deployment.
One of the features specific to
Install Anywhere 5 that's brand new
and great for server-side deployment
is Merge Module technology that
allows you to OEM your installers,
to build suite installers.
And in this case,
it allows us to pull in a component that
is going to be part of our installer.
In this example,
what I want to do is I want to
I want to go ahead and build a
web application and deploy it,
but I want to deploy it on Tomcat.
And all I need to do is
import a Tomcat merge module.
And a merge module is just a
self-contained installer component.
I go ahead and select the Merge module,
in this case the Tomcat.
It's going to load in
all those resources,
ask me where I want to put them,
and I can load all sorts of different
And just by doing that,
what it's done is it's populated all the
Tomcat files and resources necessary,
all the information it
needs to install Tomcat.
All I need to do is just drag and drop
my WAR file into the web apps directory,
build my installer, and I'm done.
So that's Install Anywhere:
Building Client and Server Installers.
Great tool.
I hope you guys find it useful.
If you have questions,
please feel free to come by our booth.
We're in the exhibitors hall.
And that's about it.
Thank you very much, Deven.
Thank you, Alan.
So, sort of in the cavalcade of tools,
the next tool I want to bring up is
Techadance with their new Magic product.
I want to bring up Pete Deemer,
their CEO.
Sort of similar to some
of the other stories,
I met these guys when I was
at Java 1 in San Francisco,
literally walking by the
booth and saw the product.
And unfortunately at that time it
wasn't actually running on our platform,
but after a loan of a CPU and,
I don't know, a day or so,
I'm sure you'll tell the story, Pete,
we had it on Mac OS X.
So I'll go ahead and turn it over to you.
Great.
Well,
Tekadence Magic is a new visual authoring
tool for building Java software.
As we see it, Java is sort of like a
100-story skyscraper.
The entrance is three stories up,
above ground level.
And unfortunately, that works to the
benefit of less powerful,
non-portable environments
like Visual Basic.
And we created Tech-at-its-Magic to
directly address this market need,
which is for an accessible,
easy-to-use tool for building 100%
pure Java applications with the
portability and power that Java offers.
So,
for a little bit more on our technology,
I'm going to turn it over to Sean Allen,
our CTO.
Hi there.
Thanks, Pete.
Prior to co-founding TechAdents,
I actually worked at
Apple Computer for about 10 years,
becoming a QuickTime engineer,
which was fun.
Added some of the Wired Movies
technology to QuickTime.
About two years ago,
I got together with Jared Kaplan
and Matthew Peterson out here to
try to apply our experience with
runtime engines and authoring tools
to create a solution to make creating
software easier for everyone.
The result of this effort
was TechAdents Magic.
And Magic's basically based on standards.
Our file format is XML.
A runtime engine basically
builds a live object model out
of precompiled Java objects,
which you kind of wire
together with JavaScript.
But the output is a
pure Java application.
Magic itself is a pure Java application.
Magic's sort of like a modern hypercard.
In a way, it enables non-technical users
to create applications without
a lot of scripting knowledge.
But we also think that Magic's
really nice to use alongside an IDE.
So you can do some source code
level coding in the IDE and then
combine it with what you build in
Magic to create things quickly.
We really like Magic on Mac OS X.
It can take advantage of QuickTime,
Java Web Start, and other things like
the Aqua look and feel.
And also the tools
provided with Mac OS X,
creating content such as iMovie, iTunes,
and iPhoto,
work really nicely with Magic.
So I'm going to turn it
over to Jared Kaplan,
who's going to talk
about how it got to OS X.
Jared Kaplan:
Our first attempt at porting Magic to
OS X came after we released the
Windows beta version of our software.
And what actually happened was that a
few of our users took it upon themselves
to just copy the jars over from their
Windows machine onto their Macs.
And of course, we tried it,
and we were like, you know, wow,
it actually works just like that.
And the amazing thing is that
Magic's a pretty big application.
It's about 800 class files.
And it took us about two years
to develop the PC version.
And less than a week, we actually got a
complete Mac version done.
And I think that's really important.
I think that's really important
because that really shows how quickly
that you can port a Java application
and how easy it is to do.
Great, so let's build a Java application
using Teknins Magic for OS X.
This is the Magic object browser,
and right now our application
just has a single object in it.
It's a window, and these are the
properties of that object.
Let's go into the visual editor just
by double-clicking on the window.
And I'm going to bring up a
scrapbook of pre-built objects.
We supply 80-plus objects across all
of these different categories to get
you started with your development.
Let's bring up our
scrapbook of UI objects,
and let's bring in a -- start
with a tab pane container.
And let's drag in a couple tab panes.
And let's drag in a couple of tab panes.
and let's bring in a slider
and a couple buttons.
Now, with Magic,
you're not constrained to working
with our collection of objects.
You can very easily
import external objects.
For example,
let's bring in a QuickTime movie.
We're just going to drag
and drop it straight into...
Manage the drag and drop here.
We're going to drag and drop it
straight into our visual editor,
and it recognizes it
as a QuickTime movie.
And one of the really neat
things about Magic is we're
building a live application here.
We're working with
pre-compiled Java objects.
What this means is that there's
no compile step necessary.
At any time,
we can see our application running live
just by clicking on our preview tool.
The video runs and the
UI is fully functional.
And while we're working
in this visual editor,
we're also constructing a hierarchy
of objects in the object browser.
And we can actually go in directly
and edit any of those properties.
We're actually going to build a little...
[Transcript missing]
and we support not simply
standalone objects,
but we also have something
called compound objects.
And compound objects are combinations
of objects that you encapsulate
into packages and can reuse
or exchange with other users.
So in this case,
I'm going to drag and drop a compound
object that does a couple of different
things onto our flash graphic.
You'll see it present there.
I'm also going to put a drag modifier
on our video window and a drag
modifier on our flash graphic so
that those will now be draggable.
So let's go into the preview tool.
And we have the scrub control.
We see our flash graphic animating
and the alpha level changing.
And we can click and drag.
We also have a little sound there.
So,
now this is part of a cool application,
but I think we need
something a little extra.
And we're going to do that with the
third major type of external object
that you can import into Magic,
and that's Java code.
So let's say we have a jar file.
This is just a simple
text-to-speech synthesizer.
We're going to just drag and
drop that jar straight in.
We're going to import it as a Java class.
And I'm actually going to define
the class that we want to expose.
And the speech class has two methods.
We use reflection to expose those.
And now I'm just simply going to drag and
drop a text field into my tab pane there.
And I'm going to patch the text
value property from the text field
to the say method of that Java class.
So, this is our application.
Now let's publish it and run it
as a standalone Java jar file.
We just choose publish.
Right now we support Java Web Start,
Java applications.
Shortly we're going to be offering
Java source code generation,
as well as a couple
of other enhancements.
So, a whole range of different
destinations that you can publish to.
Today, though, we're going to publish to
just the standalone jar file.
And we'll call this experience WWDC.
And we're going to call this
the Java source code generation.
And we're going to call
this experience WWDC.
And we're going to call this
the Java source code generation.
And we're going to call
this experience WWDC.
And let's hit OK.
And while we're publishing,
I did want to mention this
is the Mac OS X version is
available from our website,
which is techadence.com.
And it's a 90-day free trial.
And it just works great on OS X.
So let's, let's go and pull up that jar
file that we just generated and
take a look at our application.
and here it is.
We have our scrub control and
the draggable video and our nifty
beat loop and animating graphic.
And now let's go take a look
at that Java code we inserted.
Download your copy to
and David Koehn.
Thank you for your attention today.
And give it a try.
I want to thank both Zero-G and
Techadance for showing us
some really great stuff.
With that, I'm going to go ahead and
bring up Ted Goldstein.
So, Alan, how can people learn
more about Techadence,
the website,
and are they here at the show, too?
but it's techadence.com.
They'll be up front after the session's
over if anybody wants to talk to them.
And Zero-G will also be up here, too.
Great.
Thank you.
So let's talk about what
do we do on top of 1.3.1.
Well, you saw QuickTime being used.
It's using the QuickTime for
Java interface.
We have these terrific
Apple technologies that synergize
very nicely with the Java interfaces.
Although we didn't show it today,
there is the project
builder user interface,
excuse me, programming environment,
interactive development environment.
We have provided a bridge to
our Cocoa and Objective-C world,
which allows you to leverage the
Cocoa and core services frameworks.
From Sun, we've packaged some very
important 1.4 features,
because we can,
and include them as part of the 1.3.1
package until we have 1.4 available.
And that includes things like Java,
WebStart,
and the Java Secure Sockets extension.
These features,
they work fine in the 1.3.1 environment.
In the WebStart case,
they allow you to build double-clickable
web-based applications as well.
And altogether,
I think we've done a very good job of
just making the small things work and
feel really just terrific together.
On the server side,
we have two very important stories.
There's Apache Tomcat that's included
in the Mac OS X server platform.
And it, of course, is a Java application
environment for JSPs.
We ship our virtual machine tuned
for server applications on the
server in the Jaguar release.
The, uh, uh, uh,
but we've taken a very different stance.
We haven't developed our own J2EE server.
And that's because what we find is so
many other J2EE app servers come to
the platform and work extremely well.
So, that includes Primati and Lutris, uh,
JBoss and Orion, and Trifork.
The story behind Trifork is yet
another one of these Java 1 stories
where we were walking the halls,
we found a new guy, we said, "Hi,
why don't you come on and, and,
and port over?" And they said, "What,
you mean right now?" I said,
"Now's okay." Um, and within an hour,
right, it was about two hours
before my Java 1 talk,
uh, within an hour,
they were up and running.
They had ported, uh,
they had a little bit
of JNI code as well for,
for their I/O acceleration.
The, the, uh, the Java lines of code,
I think, changed one path name, and,
and bam, they were up and running.
Um, we think this is a truly tremendous
facet about the platform.
And I think you'll see more J2EE app
servers coming to the platform as well.
It's a very rich environment.
It's one that, uh, that, uh, we think is,
is extremely healthy.
And, and, um, uh, the comments, uh, I,
I think, I think you'll, you'll,
you'll be very pleased with
any of these J2EE servers.
Now, Apple has its own WebObjects
application server.
And this is a technology that has,
was originally developed at
Next and comes down to us,
uh, today,
and is now written in 100% pure Java.
And we think of it as really combining
the best features of both Java and J2EE.
And, uh, uh, some of the,
the previous work done, uh, before.
And with that, to tell you more about it,
I want to invite, uh,
Toni Trujillo-Villan.
Toni is, uh,
our director of WebObjects engineering,
and she'll give us a,
a tour of WebObjects.
Toni Trujillo-Villan: Thank you.
Thank you, Ted.
So what is WebObjects?
Well, in addition to being
Apple's best kept secret,
WebObjects delivers everything
that you need to create a
complete three-tier application.
That includes an IDE,
a database mapping tool,
and page layout and GUI design
tools to help you create your
application's user interface.
WebObjects' powerful
combination of tools,
frameworks,
and rapid design technologies drastically
decrease the complexity to develop,
deploy,
and extend your Java server application.
The key payoff for you is that WebObjects
does a lot of the work for you,
so you end up writing a lot less code.
And writing a lot less
code means less testing,
maintenance, and support down the road.
Enterprise Object Frameworks,
more commonly known as EOF,
is really the crown jewel of web objects.
EOF basically takes care of all
your connectivity needs for you.
The key feature of EOF is the ability
to do object relational mapping.
So what is object relational mapping?
Basically, it's the concept of taking raw
data from your relational database
and mapping it into objects.
Then EOF transparently syncs up
the data from your data source with
the objects in your application.
Then using some
object-oriented programming,
you can integrate your business logic.
and you can do things like consistency
checking and database val- excuse me,
data validation.
The beauty of all this is you never
have to write a single line of SQL.
EOF will take care of
all the calls for you.
On top of EOF,
we include additional tools and
frameworks that will help you
rapidly develop your application.
Using rule-based programming,
you can create a complete WebObjects
application based on your data model.
And then you can tweak your
application's user interface and
the way your application behaves
by simply adding a couple new
rules or modifying existing rules,
instead of writing any code.
We ship three distinctive rule-based
programming technologies with
WebObjects that support the
most common application types.
The first one is Direct-to-Web,
which is used to create
HTML applications.
The second one is a new
feature that we're working on
called Direct-to-Web Services.
And for those of you that were here
at the session prior to this one,
you saw an example of that.
Direct-to-Web Services is used
to automate the creation of web
service based on your data model.
The third technology is
called Direct-to-Java Client,
and it's used to create rich,
platform-independent desktop
applications based on Swing.
And Direct-to-Java Client is used
in a three-tier architecture,
but we've been working to extend this
technology to a two-tier architecture,
something we think that
you'll really like.
So with that,
I'd like to invite Andreas Wendker,
the manager of the
Rapid Development Engineering team,
up to give you a demo.
Thank you, Toni.
So for this presentation,
I'm going to use the alpha
version of the Next Web Objects
release we are planning to ship,
and I'm going to use a database
that stores real estate data.
You can actually see the most important
tables of this database on the screen
right now in our database modeling tool.
And as you can see,
there are tables that store information
about persons in different roles,
like agents and customers.
There's a table for listing
properties with the number of
bedrooms and bathrooms and prices.
And there are tables for addresses,
features, and photos of listings.
What I would like to do now is take
this database model and run it through
a project builder assistant to create
a rule-based swing application.
So I'm going to create a new project
and select the right template for it.
Then ask before name.
The next question is what kind of
additional JAR files I want to use.
I don't need any for this demonstration,
so I'm going to just skip this step.
And then I'm going to add the
database model for this real
estate database to my application.
The last step is just a
question whether I want to
build and launch my project now.
Project Builder now created this
project for me and the assistant
automatically triggered that it
compiles and then starts afterwards.
While I'm talking to you right now,
web objects in our rule system
are actually hard at work to
analyze the database and to come
up with a user interface that
is appropriate for the data.
The first window, as you can see,
that it presents me with is
a query window that I use to
search for the different persons,
administrators, agents, customers,
and most importantly, listings.
Let me just pretend to be a customer that
wants to search for a house right now,
and maybe I want to search
a house in Cupertino.
So the database offers
me four properties here,
and oops, they are all very expensive.
Well, maybe I need to do another search.
That looks a little better.
Let me look at some detail
for the first one here.
It's in Cupertino, that's good.
It has two stories and air conditioning.
Even has a nice photo.
So maybe I should call the
agent and make an appointment.
My name is Toni.
Let me see if I can find
some more detail for this.
She definitely looks
like I can work with her.
And there's her phone number.
But wait, I don't have to call her.
She's right here.
So as you saw,
this was actually a realistic
demonstration of our rule-based
technologies with just a
database model and a couple
of clicks in Project Builder.
I was able to create a fully-featured
Swing desktop application that
I can now use as a starting
point for my development process.
Thank you, Toni.
Thank you, Andreas.
So when you develop with WebObjects,
you have your choice of
deployment platforms.
You can deploy to a J2SE server
application that we ship with WebObjects
or any J2EE server applications,
where WebObjects can run side by
side with other J2EE applications.
With either one of these
deployment scenarios,
you can create a flexible,
scalable deployment configuration.
WebObject ships as a standalone
product with development tools
and a deployment license.
Our deployment packages are also
bundled with Mac OS X Server.
and to ensure that WebObjects is
no longer Apple's best kept secret,
we have 17 sessions this year at
the Developer Conference so you can
find out more about this technology.
All of our sessions are located
in room A1 throughout the week.
Thanks.
So I don't know if it was clear,
but zero lines of code.
Zero lines of code.
And I think that's one of the amazing
things about when you have this kind of
rule-based systems is that really many
applications really are a transformation
of the schema and the database into
the model that's being presented.
And the first cut of
application is not bad,
right?
It's pretty usable.
Then you can go on and refine it
and tailor it to suit you yourself.
So I think it's a very
impressive technology.
If you haven't taken a
look at WebObjects before,
I really highly recommend
you check it out.
The next thing I want to talk
about is raising the bar on Java.
We talked about this morning at Steve's
keynote how we want to raise the bar on
development tools and the environment.
We also want to raise the bar on Java.
We're doing everything extremely well,
but we can still do things better.
You can still see that there's
a short pause in startup times.
We want to get even better
fidelity with Acquia.
I think it's very hard for people to even
see that there is any lack of change,
but our goal is to be
perfect with Acquia.
We want to, of course,
use less memory on the platform
so that you can fit many,
many Java applications simultaneously,
and that makes it extremely good
for shrink wrap applications.
Now, Java app is probably still bigger
than its Cocoa Objective-C equivalent,
but nevertheless,
it's still extremely usable.
I think one of the most important
things that people have asked for
that we do is we want to better
track Sun's release schedule.
Right now, we're shipping 1.3.1,
and we would, of course,
prefer to be on 1.4.
We want to think about
how we want to do that.
Of course, better integration with the
rest of the desktop features,
things like drawers and other
kinds of components that really are
part of what you expect from the
Mac OS X environment that are not
necessarily part of what most people
tend to think of as Java native things,
so that, for example,
you can write a system
preferences panel with Java.
Our goal really is to raise the
bar on Java so that it is 100%
everything possible on the platform.
There is a course associated with this.
We have to delay the 1.4 release
until we can shift the foundation
of Java away and off of Carbon today
and into a Cocoa environment.
And this includes things like
shifting the threading model.
Today we are very tightly tied into
the Carbon way of doing things.
Many of the applications that themselves
are implemented today using Carbon are
facing some of the same issues.
Nevertheless,
it's time now for Java to do this,
to really make the transition
from Carbon onto a full Cocoa,
shall we say, environment where we
can leverage and such.
So, to give you a quick roadmap,
what we have today on the website,
I believe, is that correct?
Yes.
I wanted to make sure.
We have the 1.4.0 virtual
machine working today,
but it's using the 1.3.1
user interface classes.
And so this is an interesting thing
because it also means that we are
actually beginning support for multiple
VMs on the platform for developer
mode and to make that work possible.
And we want to get your feedback
as to whether or not you think this
is something which we should be
doing for our production release.
We will beta later in the year
the 1.4 virtual machine with
the 1.4 user interface classes.
And I say 1.4.x in the slide,
meaning that we don't know whether
we should be on 1.4.1 or 1.4.2.
I think a lot depends upon Sun's
release schedule and the way that they
are seeing their releases shape up.
So, really, we want to get synchronized,
if you will, so that, in fact,
it's a very simple port to take the
change set and to bring it over.
That re-architecting is ongoing
now and is fundamental to the
commitment we want to make to you,
that we are mindful of
your desires to have 1.4.0.
And what we are doing
here is to give you,
in fact, I think, the most versatile and
best Java possible.
So, that's the road to 1.4.
One more thing.
You know, as some of you may know,
I'm originally from Sun Microsystems,
and I'd like to invite my
old friend James Gosling up.
and James Goldstein.
Good afternoon, Ted, or good evening,
or... James is a long-time Mac user.
Where's your titanium, James?
It's sitting in my bag there
with a basically dead battery.
Battery exchange.
That's what we've got to do.
Well, you know, it's the end of the day,
and I've been sitting
there hacking along,
and in between the good bits, you know,
I actually get some work done.
But Ted had actually asked me to
come here and say a little bit about,
you know, why I do--why I use a Mac.
And in some sense, you know,
my purpose of coming
here is to say to Apple,
you know, thanks for giving me the
freedom to buy a Mac.
I mean, I'm...
I'm one of these people who doesn't
have the luxury of being able to
deploy software just on the Mac.
Stuff that I write has to run
on a lot of different places.
One of the sad tragedies of the world
is that if you're going to buy a laptop,
most of them are infected.
And, you know, ever since OS X came out,
and then once the really
nice Java VM came out,
all of a sudden there was a machine
that both I could do my job on
and it didn't make my skin crawl,
which I felt was a wonderful combination.
I mean, there are a lot of things
to love about Macs.
I mean, I'm a little bit of a Mac user,
but I'm also sort of a closet Linux user.
And, to a large extent, actually,
these days I'm more an ex-Linux
user than anything else,
because I've sort of come
to think of Mac OS X as sort
of Linux with QA and taste.
[Transcript missing]
The user community that was used to
guide the design was a bunch of bankers.
So it's like if you're targeting bankers,
you get something that
looks like the bank.
And, you know, using any old Java app,
the first app I ever tried
to run on a Mac was NetBeans.
And, you know, I had one of the standard,
you know, really good experiences,
namely I copied over the Windows release,
wrote a little shell script to launch it,
and it just ran.
and that's predominantly the
experience that people have.
Unless they've done some JNI stuff,
things just run.
So you heard it from James Gosling:
All right.
Thanks, Ted.
Thank you very much.
Thanks.
So very glad to have James on
board and to be using Mac as his
personal productivity device.
I want to invite Alan Samuels
up to give the roadmap again and
discuss what else we will find,
and I think we may actually
have a little time for some Q&A.
[Transcript missing]